Thank you, Mr. President. On the bill. My colleagues have talked about whether or not we're fighting over parliamentary procedure or civility or politics. And the answer is, of course, all of the above. But as the chair of the Democrats' Legislative Task Force on Rules and Budgetary Reform, I've had an opportunity to listen to the testimony of people from throughout the State of New York, with their views not only about what is a reality, our dysfunction, but also what we can do about it. And I've also been happily forced to start to study parliamentary procedure, because in fact the purpose of parliamentary procedure is to assure that we have both civility and fairness in moving forward on a day-to-day basis legislatively. And Senator Connor was right when he points out that -- and Senator Bruno was right earlier today when he pointed out that the Majority rules. But the history and the purpose of parliamentary procedure throughout history in both England and the United States, of which our government is modeled after, was to assure that there were standard codes that assured that it is the right in a democracy, small "D," that in a legislature there is the right of free and fair debate, the right of the majority to decide and the right of the minority to protest and be protected. And that without dissenting voices, there is no public debate. And without vigorous public debate in all parts of the legislative process, covered by the media to inform citizens, there is no democracy. And that is why we are here today fighting for changes in our rules, to ensure that we no longer continue to be the dysfunctional legislature that in our hearts all of us know we sit in, and that it is the people's business we are sent here to do, and that we will not accomplish our goals and we will watch year after year more decisions being taken away from us and moved into, frankly, either the Governor's chambers or the judiciary if we fail the assignment of in fact small "D" democratizing ourselves through following fundamental parliamentary procedure. And the New York State Open Meeting Law says it is essential to the maintenance of a democratic society that the public business be performed in an open and public manner and that citizens of the state be fully aware of and able to observe the performance of public officials and attend and listen to the deliberations and decisions that go into the making of public policy. And that the people must be able to remain informed if they are to retain control over those who are their public servants. It is the only climate under which the commonwealth will prosper and enable governmental process to operate for the benefit of those who created it. And parliamentary procedure is relatively simple and clear once you get through all of the detail. And it talks about some fundamental principles. The purpose is to facilitate the transaction of business and to promote cooperation and harmony; to assure equality of rights, that all members have equal rights, privileges, and obligations; that the majority does vote to decide, but that these votes should be recorded; and that the minority's rights should also be protected and that there should be the right of discussion, full and free, on every proposition presented for decision and the right of information and fairness and good faith. And my frustration here tonight is that the package that has been offered by the Majority to be the rules of the Senate for the next two years don't meet any of those standards. And they're not my standards, they're the standards from the "Standard Code of Parliamentary Procedure," which I am advised is the definitive work on parliamentary procedure guiding and governing legislatures and other organizations throughout the United States. So the task is to meet simple parliamentary procedure and hopefully have greater civility between us, as Senator Connor was addressing. And yet this package tonight does not reduce the near-total control of the Majority Leader over the legislative process; does not end the practice of closed-door governing on major issues; does not open the legislative process to greater public scrutiny and input; does almost nothing to improve the critical committee process, merely codifies current Senate practices; does not put into place a workable conference committee process between the two houses; does not require a recorded vote on every Senate floor action, including discharge motions and nonsponsored, also known as hostile, amendments; does not permit the Minority to put forth alternatives to what the Majority has proposed; does not give Minority members a more equitable share of resources; and, perhaps worst of all, effectively prohibits any future efforts to reform the Senate Rules on the floor. What the people see here is clear. What we ought to expect of ourselves is clear. We know we can do better. I would argue and will argue later that the Minority has proposed a definitive package of rules for this legislature that does do better, that does meet the standards of parliamentary procedure. And so I am disappointed with the outcome today and hope that my colleagues on both sides will still look carefully at the package that the Democratic Minority put out over two weeks ago to the public and consider an alternative package to the one that has been presented to us today. Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you, Mr. President. I believe that there is an amendment at the desk. And I'd ask that the reading of the amendment be waived and would like to be heard on my amendment.
Thank you. I rise to propose Amendment Number 3, to empower communities, open bill sponsorship, and improve the legislative record and make more information available to the public. This amendment would alter the Majority's proposed rules for 2005-2006 in a variety of ways. One, it would allow the ranking Minority member or any three committee members of either party to place a bill on a committee agenda to be debated in the committee. Two, it would allow the ranking Minority member or any three committee members of any party to hold a public hearing. Three, it would authorize any Senator to join on any bill as a cosponsor. Four, it would require detailed committee reports on each bill that is reported to the floor. Five, it would require more information to be made available to the public through the Internet. The active list, including committee transcripts and votes, fiscal notes, and Senate expenditure reports all should be available to the public far more easily. Democracy is good. My party right here is prepared to have our votes counted when we do hostile amendments. We're even proposed to publicly disagree with each other and not always vote together on every bill. That is open government. That's what we're striving for. Allowing committees to function as they do in most state legislatures, as many reports have documented -- as Congress operates -- ensures that there is public discourse, that there is public information about the bills being put forward, that there's an opportunity for the committee to actually listen to various bills and debate them and vote on them and decide whether they should move to the floor or not for a vote. That is a radical change from how we do business today in the Senate and how we would continue to do business under the rules proposed by the Majority tonight. The simple concept of allowing ranking members or a group of members of a committee to decide whether a bill can even be put on a committee agenda for a discussion and debate, or to have a public hearing on a bill -- not every bill, but on bills that are felt to be important enough by a certain number of committee members or the ranker for the committee -- is standard operating procedure in many legislatures throughout this country. Open bill sponsorship is a fundamental way for the voters to see where their leaders, their legislators are on particular legislation. Senator Schneiderman used an example earlier; I just want to clarify it. Because, in this house, Minority members are universally or, with some exception, not allowed to submit a buck slip and have it accepted to be cosponsors of bills, to say to you, our colleagues and to the world, We support this legislation, we'd like to move it, because of that last year in this chamber a bill called Timothy's Law, with 33 Republican sponsors, enough sponsors to pass the bill without one Democrat, a bill that didn't get to this floor despite the fact that 23 Democrats signed buck slips asking to cosponsor that bill -- that was 56 Senators out of 62 who were on record as saying they wanted this bill to at least come to the floor for a debate. Open bill sponsorship is a very simple and very clear-cut way to document democracy and the democratic process. Our amendment would allow for it. Finally, our amendment would allow for improving the legislative record and making more information available to the public. Constituents should be able to obtain information about their Senator's views and their actions and their votes here on the floor, on motions to discharge, on hostile amendments, and on bills. The legislative process itself should be as clear and transparent as we, as legislators, and modern technology can possibly make it. And frankly, thanks to the Internet and television, there is so much more we could do to ensure that the public knows what goes on up in our chamber and what doesn't. And they will become greater participants in the process of government and democracy for it. So I hope that my colleagues will join me in supporting this amendment tonight. Thank you, Mr. President.
Madam President, I appreciate my colleague's levity.
And I had one more, so that's perfect.
As you referenced in your explanation, there's actually two bills on calendar today that appear to be almost identical. Could you explain the difference between the two for me?
-- authorities or IDAs or the process?
Thank you very much. Thank you, Senator Schneiderman. I rise in support of Senator Sabini's amendment. We are a few months away from a mandate to have new voting machines up in every voting precinct in the State of New York. And regardless of how we got, to this point in time, this close to a mandate, it is so clear that the only possible technology we can go forward with at this point in time, that we can assure the voters of New York State that their votes will be counted, that the audits will be available, that there will be transparency and reliability, are precinct-based optical scanners. So I hope that we will revisit this question today, not in dispute with Senator Flanagan's bill, but in recognition, I think, of the same thing he knows, that New York State is in serious trouble right now when it comes to assuring the integrity of our next set of elections into the future. And if we were to move this amendment of Senator Sabini's, which is also a freestanding bill, which is also a bill that has been introduced in the Assembly, we could assure the voters of New York State that we could meet our obligations not just under federal law but to protect the integrity of their vote through a technology that has been used for decades throughout the State of New York, which is reliable, which is affordable, and we believe is available. So I urge everyone to consider a vote for this amendment. Thank you, Madam President.
Mr. President, on the bill.
Thank you. You stated in your explanation that this plan is $3.5 billion less in General Fund money than last year's budget, I believe. How does that compare with the Governor's proposed budget?
Explanation.
Thank you, Mr. President. I do have a series of questions for the sponsor, so thank you very much. To start, just to clarify, Senator Skelos, before he turned over the questions to Senator DeFrancisco, pointed out that we are trying to get a budget done on time or even early this year. But of course, for the record, these bills were received with messages of necessity and have only been in print and available to the public and to ourselves for a few hours. And so we do have a series of questions about what's actually in these budget bills and what's not. But if I might start by asking, because we're working hard to stay apace, are we expecting any other bills to be brought to the floor this evening? And if so, have we received any other messages of necessity on budget bills from the Governor?
Thank you. And, Mr. President, to follow up, do we know if there's a total budget agreement on all the remaining outstanding issues? Even though I understand from Senator DeFrancisco's answer to my last question there are not necessarily budget bills in print, available for us to see on all the other sections of the budget.
Thank you, Mr. President. If the sponsor would continue to yield.
Thank you. So my understanding is there is a full agreement on the budget, at least in principle, in outline, but not necessarily all the individual bills yet in print. Is there information that my Senate colleagues from the Majority could share with us in advance of those bills so that we could see what the specific agreements are between the, so to speak, three leaders in the room?
Thank you, Mr. President. I appreciate the sponsor's response. Again, just for the record, the concern is that there was only an outline of verbal statements and quick summaries from the conference committees and through the mother ship, and we were hoping to actually see the language of agreements before bills showed up. Because we know, as was raised in the beginning, that there's an expectation that we are going to move very, very quickly through the budget bills. And again, information is knowledge, and it would be better to have more than a couple of hours of information and knowledge before having to make difficult decisions on behalf of the State of New York. But to start questioning on this bill before us tonight, I'm going to start with some transportation questions --
Thank you so much. I am asking the sponsor to yield for some questions.
Thank you. What the total of All Funds appropriation for the transportation budget, and how is that different from the current year transportation budget?
Thank you, Mr. President. The first question I think highlights the dilemma for us in trying to move forward with the budget, that we are being asked to vote on language bills that explains how money is going to be used without actually having seen the appropriation bills yet that show the dollar amount of what they're going to be used for.
Oh, of course. May --
Thank you, Mr. President. I don't think anybody wants to have marathon sessions that are unnecessary. We just want to ask questions and get answers to them before we actually vote for or against individual budget bills. And as my colleague so well explained, we're on a language bill -- Article VII, transportation, economic development, environmental conservation -- where most sections of the bill relate to appropriations, but we have yet to have final appropriation language for the bills. It's sort of like when we do the budget each year, spending the money before we do revenue bills explaining where we got the money. So again, this whole process is a little out of order. If I could just jump to -- does this bill lay out any language for plans to either continue the MTA payroll tax at its current levels or change that MTA payroll tax?
Thank you. Does this bill --
Excuse me. I'm going to get the rhythm of that, I promise, Mr. President.
No, no, I'm usually very good at this. So I will stay focused on going through you, Mr. President. Through you, Mr. President, if the sponsor would continue to yield.
You have to wait for him to answer.
Thank you very much. What in this bill specifically changes anything in transportation policy or MTA policy, since we have agreed that there's not really money in this bill? Could you go over for me the changes in transportation budget, transportation policy, capital budget or policy, or MTA budget or policy?
Thank you. I appreciate the explanation. Mr. President, if through you the sponsor would continue to yield.
Thank you. Senator DeFrancisco just laid out a number of permanent extenders that are built into this Article VII bill. Why is the Legislature taking the position that we should do permanent extenders of changes in the law as opposed to extenders that match with budget years?
Thank you, Mr. President. If the sponsor would continue to yield, please.
Thank you. Moving into the economic development section of this bill, this is a language bill, as we've already established. And is there language about the state's economic development plan specifically laid out in this bill? Are we continuing to push for a mission of revitalization in economic development? And how are we planning to do that in the context of these language changes?
Thank you, Mr. President. If through you the sponsor will continue to yield.
Thank you. I believe that the Senator is referencing Part DD of this bill in what he reviewed on the UDC or ESDC requiring to submit a financial plan to the DOB and go through the documentation of their various accounts. Which I have to say I think is actually a very good thing for us to be doing. But I'm confused because I don't believe any of this was discussed in the conference committee or the report. Was this part of the economic development conference discussions?
Mr. President, if through you the sponsor will continue to yield.
Thank you. Again, referencing Part DD of this bill specific to economic development, it references a series of separate accounts within ESDC. Are these new accounts we're discussing or simply a review of all the existing accounts?
Thank you. Mr. President, if through you the sponsor would continue to yield.
There's also a Part EE of the bill which is an authorization for an Empire State New Market Corporation. Could the sponsor please explain what that is to me?
Mr. President, if through you the sponsor would continue to yield.
Thank you. And following up on this question of these new market credits and the creation somehow of LLCs in order to take advantage of these federal tax credits, is there any matching state cost associated with the creation of this program or this section of the Article VII language?
Thank you. Mr. President, if through you the sponsor would continue to yield.
Thank you. So we have a new program created within this bill which would hopefully allow us to take advantage of some federal tax credits, I hear to the tune of $30 million, and it would be involving LLCs. Would the Independent Authorities Budget Office have oversight on this program? And would there be the same requirements for transparency and audit by the Independent Public Authorities Budget Office as was created in our Public Authorities Reform Act? And don't ask me to say that again.
And, Mr. President, if the sponsor would continue to yield.
Thank you. So it's my understanding that this section, Part EE, like Part DD, were not discussed at the conference committee tables. Are there any other sections of this bill that we are seeing tonight that did not come out of conference committee discussions?
Thank you, Mr. President. Actually, I appreciate Senator DeFrancisco's direct answers to my questions. Again, it highlights my earlier point that it would have been helpful had there been actual language available for people to see before we actually were moving the new bill to the floor. And again, for the record, Senate law requires that bills that are being voted on on the floor actually have memos. And I, at least, don't see memos to this budget bill on my desk. I'm certainly not going to delay the process here tonight. But again, for the record, many of the questions that we want to make sure get asked are because we went through conference committees -- better than some years, not perfect -- we were not provided language agreements between the two houses prior to coming to the floor of the Senate. We are desperately reading the bills literally as we are moving them. And again, for the record, I -- perhaps it's on other people's desks, but I don't see a memo to this bill here before us.
No, I was making a point that there is no memo. Or perhaps I'll make that a question. Is there a memo for this bill?
Thank you. Mr. President, if the sponsor would continue to yield, please.
Thank you. Without ceding agreement that not all bills that come to the floor of the Senate need memos because I'm pretty sure all bills need memos -- the next bill that I'm advised we may be taking up tonight, the government operations appropriation bill, can I assume that there will be a memo for that bill before we take it up on the floor?
Thank you.
Because I want to agree with Senator DeFrancisco that this bill we're discussing now is, for budget bill purposes, a relatively small bill. But the government ops appropriation bill that we got I believe around 5:30 this evening was approximately that thick (indicating) in its original format, so a memo certainly would be valuable for being able to improve the questions and the process. Following back up on my questions on this bill, if the sponsor would continue to yield.
Thank you. There was some disagreement over the last few weeks around regional economic development councils. How were those issues resolved in this Article VII bill? Have we established the regional development councils, and do we know what source of funding will be used for them?
So it sounds like I will go back to those questions at a later time when we deal with the appropriate bill. I want to thank the sponsor for his answers to my questions, and I believe that several of my other colleagues have additional questions to ask.
Part U.
Explanation.
Thank you very much. Through you, Mr. President, if the sponsor would please yield to a question.
Thank you. As I am combing through the memo and the legislation, I come across a section on miscellaneous items; it's page 7 in the memo. Can you explain what the special emergency appropriation of $100 million and the special federal emergency appropriation of $1 billion are and will be used for?
Page 7 of the memo, miscellaneous items, third bullet from the bottom.
Thank you, Mr. President, if the sponsor would please yield to an additional question.
Thank you. A year ago when we were dealing with the budget and we were on the other side of the aisle, we were asked in debate why we were hiding this billion dollars of special federal emergency appropriation money. In fact, Senator Young was on record in the press that we received a billion dollars in unrestricted federal funds which we could be using to help our dairy farms as well as restore other funds to other programs. So I guess now that we're on the reverse side of the aisle, I'm curious to just get a clarification. Can we use this billion dollars for other programs that we're apparently cutting, in fact, 10 percent across the board at this time?
We cannot. So thank you, sponsor. And we could not a year ago. Thank you, Mr. President.
Point of order, Mr. President.
Thank you, Mr. President. Well, clearly passions run high. We're all upset. We all know we need to get a budget done. We all know there's a $10 billion deficit. We all know there will be large cuts on many, many parts of the budget that we each care about. And sometimes passions run high and people might say the wrong thing. But I did want to make sure before we close that we set the record straight on a few things that were said. I want to thank Senator Adams for getting up and clarifying the reality that prisoner reduction is not due to what we did with Rockefeller Drug Law. It's simply not the fact. And it's also true that there are reasons why the crime rate is going down, because of very hard work by our police and in our communities. And that is a win/win for us all. There was also some aspersions thrown at when we, the Democrats, controlled the Senate for two years out of, oh, most of the last century. The budget increased a hundred percent, $60 billion to $120 billion between 1996 and 2008 when we had a Republican Senate and a Republican Governor. Our debt doubled during that time period from $25 billion to $52 billion. Between '89 and 2008, this house, under Republican control, voted to raise taxes by $131 billion. And the budget was late, 1999 to 2006, by 819 days. So we all can share blame. And we all have to take responsibility for getting it right now and dealing with the tough issues. But to make statements on the record of the Senate without making sure that they are clarified, for the facts to be written into the record of this wonderful institution, is that this was not something because of this side for two years or that side for 92 years.
We all have responsibility to bear. And we need to move forward. And I think that some of my colleagues were passionate about their anger about some of the cuts in this budget on both sides of the aisle. And that's real. And whoever told us that watching the sausage being made was all nice and easy and pretty? It's not. We're watching, we are making the sausage here tonight. And it's not pretty. But it's going to get done in a reasonable period of time. And I agree with my colleagues it won't be the best budget we could have done, and it's not going to be a good budget for many people in many of our communities. But we have to go forward and we have to go forward with civility on both sides of the aisle. And despite the fact that I have major problems with much of the budget, I also tonight will be voting yes on this bill and believe that we will be passing it soon. Thank you, Mr. President.
Thank you very much. First off, thank you, Senator DeFrancisco for the explanation. And yes, we all appreciate that now we're getting memos to look at before we're asked to vote on bills. And it does certainly help us, given how short the timeline is from bill printing to coming to the floor. Mr. President, through you, I do have a few questions on this bill if the sponsor will yield.
Thank you. Senator, in your presentation you did go over Part F, elimination of election law print and publication, which had been in the Governor's original budget but was ultimately rejected. Can you tell me what the cost or the savings from that proposal would have been both to the state and to the localities?
Mr. President, if through you the sponsor would continue to yield.
Thank you. Would there have been a local savings as well? Because my understanding was this was printing by election districts in their local papers of specific information.
Thank you. Mr. President, if the sponsor would continue to yield.
Thank you. In Section I, AIM funding, reducing Aid and Incentives to Municipalities, this bill zeros out the $302 million AIM funding for one year to the City of New York. Is that correct?
If, through you, the sponsor would continue to yield.
Thank you. And as I recall in last year's budget, when we also zeroed out approximately $302 million in AIM funding to the City of New York, we -- the State of New York explicitly committed to putting AIM funding back for the for the City of New York at the same reduction share as other local municipalities in this budget year. Is that the sponsor's recollection as well?
Mr. President, through you, for the record, I do believe that last year's budget language explicitly made a commitment to restore AIM funding to the City of New York. And of course my colleague is right that you go year to year and you have new realities to deal with. But we did make that commitment, Senators on both sides of the aisle. Certainly Senators from New York City, Republicans and Democrats. So I'm disturbed that we're not making good on that.
Yes.
Thank you. Mr. President, if the sponsor would continue to yield.
Thank you. Section L clarifies the state will assume responsibility for payments in lieu of taxes for certain lands I guess in or around the City of Rochester. Can you tell me what new expenses the state has committed to with this section and for how long a period?
Okay.
Thank you, Mr. President. If through you the sponsor will continue to yield.
I appreciate the sponsor's answer. I believe it is correct. But the follow-up of my question was and what will it cost the state this year and in future years, for how long when we are paying some amount of PILOTs in lieu of taxes or taking on the commitment of responsibility for PILOT payments.
Thank you. Mr. President, quickly on the bill.
Thank you. I appreciate very much the sponsor's answers to my questions. By and large, this document is almost identical to the Executive's original proposal to the Legislature, and so I don't think there is areas for wide disagreement on this piece of legislation. So I'm planning on voting yes. Thank you very much.
Explanation.
Thank you, Mr. President. If through you the sponsor would yield. There is going to be I think quite an extensive series of questions on this bill.
Thank you so much. Of course because when you start to deal with the questions of revenue for the state budget, you're really getting into the questions of the overall size of the budget, what we're bringing in, what we have to spend. So I had saved some questions specifically around the overall budget to be discussed in the context of this bill. What is the exact overall size of the budget when you add all the different bills together that we are passing yesterday and today? I'm assuming we're done today.
Yes, sir.
Mr. President, through you. The Governor's original proposed budget was how much?
I believe he said it was $132.5 billion. But your staff could correct me. Is it correct that the Legislature's version of the total budget added $250 million, as was said at the conference committee?
Mr. President, if through you -- I appreciate the sponsor's confusion. I too am confused at --
To restate, I do believe that the Governor's original proposal was a $132.5 billion All Funds budget that there was discussion of through negotiations with the Legislature having added $250 million in total to the All Funds. But I believe I just heard the Senator say that this budget, all funds, is $132.5 billion. Therefore, I guess my follow-up question is where did we subtract $250 million? Because apparently we added $250 million.
Thank you, Mr. President. If through you the sponsor would continue to yield.
And I do appreciate the sponsor's answer to my question. And we will be following up because we believe that the Governor announced in the final announcement about the budget deal that $250 million had been added to the General Fund. So there may be some language disagreement -- on All Funds, excuse me, $250 million had been added to All Funds.
Please. Yes.
Thank you. Thank you. Mr. President, if through you the sponsor will continue to yield.
Jumping to General Fund, my understanding was that the net change in spending for General Fund was $608 million in increases. Can we confirm that that's correct?
If the sponsor would continue to yield.
When I'm doing my tally -- and, you know, obviously in a budget it's important to understand the pluses and the minuses -- there was an addition of $272 million for education. Is that correct?
A $272 million education add for General Fund.
$86 million for higher education?
$180 million for health and Medicaid?
$33 million for other?
$91 million for human services?
That adds up to have $662 million of adds to General Fund.
I appreciate that. Again, I'm staying focused on the General Fund money now.